Workers Compensation - Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ)

It is important to understand workers compensation laws in your state as both an employer and an employee. Workers compensation insurance can help protect your business and employees in events including falling on ice, injuries while moving office furniture, car accidents following client visits, and more. Below are the 10 most frequently asked workers compensation questions.
 
What Is Workers Compensation?
Workers compensation insurance helps protect businesses and their employees from financial loss when an employee is hurt on the job or gets sick from a work-related cause. Workers compensation is also known as workman’s comp, workman’s compensation, and Workers comp. These terms all mean the same thing and help protect workers from potentially devastating costs of work-related injuries. It also helps protect employers from potential damages that could cripple a business based on Workers comp claims. Learn more about what is Workers compensation insurance.
 
What Does Workers Compensation Cover?
Another frequently asked question includes the coverage of Workers compensation insurance. The Hartford’s Workers compensation insurance helps cover medical expenses, lost wages, ongoing care costs, as well as funeral expenses if an employee is hurt, becomes sick, or dies as a result of a work-related accident or illness.
 
What Is Not Covered by Workers Comp?
Workers compensation insurance can help protect your business and employees in the event of a covered loss, but some situations take place on the job that are not covered by workman's comp insurance. These vary from state to state and are typically determined by different state laws.
 
Here are a few examples of what most Workers compensation plans do not cover:
 
Injuries received by a fight that an employee started
Injuries an employee sustains due to being intoxicated in the workplace
Injuries an employee gets intentionally
Emotional injuries that are not accompanied by a physical workplace trauma – learn more about mental health in the workplace
Who Pays for Workers Compensation Benefits?
Employers who do not pay for benefits typically purchase Workers compensation insurance to cover the benefits for employees. Most states require businesses to carry Workers compensation insurance with the exception of Texas. In those states, coverage is elective.
 
Employees are not responsible for paying for Workers compensation benefits. Workers comp insurance costs vary greatly depending on many factors, including:
 
State laws
Business size
Type of work employees do
On-the-job risks
What Should an Employee Do if Hurt on the Job?
If an employee is injured on the job, they should report the injury to their supervisor immediately. When the injury is reported, the report should include the date, time, and circumstances of the injury. Each state has different requirements about when an injury should be reported, but it’s always best to report the injury as soon as it happens.
 
Job-related illnesses that worsen over time should be reported as soon as a diagnosis has been obtained by the employee or as soon as they learn the injury or illness is related to their job.
 
How Do I File a Workers Compensation Claim?
Filing a Workers compensation claim as soon as possible is important. Report a workplace injury or illness if:
 
The injured person is an employee of your business
Your employee became sick due to their work
The employee gets injured because of job-related duties
If the employee gets hurt in the workplace
Make sure your employee gets the proper medical treatment if they’re injured on the job. If you need to, call the ambulance or take them to the emergency room. If their recovery requires time off from work, approve their request.
 
Before filing a claim, you'll need to gather a lot of information. The actual information you’ll need can vary from state to state. Some general information an employer and employee may need to include when filing a claim includes:
 
Company information (account number and location, policy number)
Injured employee information (name, date of birth, address, phone number, Social Security number, age, gender, etc.)
Details of the incident (date of incident, type of injury, exact body part injured, the cause of injury, estimated number of days the employee will lose, anticipated return date, any witnesses, etc.)
Once the necessary information is collected, you should file the claim with your insurance company as soon as possible. This process can differ depending on the state your business operates in. States may impose a window of time business owners have to report the matter to their Workers compensation insurance carrier. New York, for example, requires reports to be filed within 30 days.
 
If you're filing a claim with The Hartford, our team of experts can help you every step of the way. You can file a claim online or call us at 800-327-3636.
 
How Does Workers Compensation Insurance Work?
How Workers comp works is another common question. The Hartford's Workers compensation insurance helps cover wages and medical benefits if an employee suffers a work-related injury or illness. Our goal is to get your employees healthy and back to work as soon as possible.
 
Our coverage gives employees access to caring, experienced professionals at every step of their recovery. Other benefits include:
 
Preferred Medical Provider Network: Our nationwide network of more than 1 million providers can be accessed by employees.
Nursed Back to Health: The Hartford provides nurse case managers to help coordinate care and treatment.
Prescription Drug Features: More than 65,000 pharmacies throughout the U.S. to fill prescriptions. Prescriptions can be filled with no out-of-pocket expense to the employee. Mail order service can also be requested.
Learn more about Workers compensation insurance from The Hartford. Get a quote today for your business.
 
If an Employee Is Receiving Workman’s Comp Benefits, Are They Eligible for Disability, Unemployment, or Social Security Benefits?
Employees receiving Workers compensation income benefits are not automatically ineligible for the benefits above. One thing to note is the number of benefits due under other programs may be affected by Workers comp benefits. Your company’s benefits office should be contacted for specific information regarding eligibility for long-term disability and unemployment insurance benefits.
 
Learn more about Workers compensation and disability.
 
Do I Have to Have Workers Compensation Insurance?
In most states, any employer with one or more employees is required to carry workers compensation insurance. Texas is exempt from this. Large employers may insure themselves, but they must apply with their state and meet strict self-insurance requirements.
 
It’s important to note that not all workers must be covered by this type of insurance. For example, Workers comp doesn’t typically cover independent contractors, domestic workers in private homes, and volunteers. Some states also exclude seasonal workers when the work they do is not part of the employer’s regular business or profession. Other Workers comp exemptions exclude certain agricultural businesses, construction businesses, charities, and more.
 
There are typically two options for buying workman’s comp insurance: private insurance companies and state-funded programs. North Dakota, Ohio, Washington, and Wyoming are the only states that require businesses to obtain only from state programs.
 
How Do I Get Workers Compensation Insurance?
You can buy Workers compensation insurance online, from an agent, or over the phone. The state your business is in determines your workman’s comp policy requirements. Many factors could play a role in determining the coverage you need and how much you will pay for Workers comp. Here's some information to know before buying a policy:
 
How many employees need coverage
The number of employees at your business
The type of work employees will be doing
Your payroll size
Business owners can buy Workers comp insurance from private insurance companies or state-funded Workers compensation programs.
 
It's important to note that not all insurance carriers sell this coverage directly to business owners. Some providers only offer it through agents.
 
With The Hartford, you can be rest assured your business is protecting your employees with industry-leading care. Get a quote today online, through an agent, or by calling 855-510-0984.
 
We’re here to help you get the best Workers compensation insurance for your business and employees.. And if an employee is injured or sick from a work-related cause, you can rest easy knowing they have access to our claims specialists and programs aimed at getting them recovered and back to work as soon as possible.



What Is a Workers Compensation Audit?
When an employee suffers a work-related injury or illness, Workers compensation insurance can help, providing benefits such as:
 
Medical care
Wages from lost work time
Ongoing care
Funeral costs
Disability benefits
During a Workers compensation premium audit, your company’s payroll will get verified. Audits look at your payroll because your Workers compensation premiums are partly based on the amount of compensation paid to your employees over a policy term. The amount paid includes money and benefits your workers have received.
 
Your insurance premium also depends on job classifications. These classifications help show the amount of risk your workers face. So, if the audit finds job duties and roles have changed at your business, you may receive a different premium.
 
When reporting your payroll, be sure to include any overtime payments employees receive. This will ensure your payroll record is as accurate as possible.
 
One of the main benefits to a Workers comp audit is that it makes sure your coverage and premium match. This is important because it means you won’t be paying too much for your Workers compensation coverage.
 
Most states require insurance companies to audit a majority, if not all, of their policies. Also, keep in mind that if your policy expires, your insurance carrier still has the right to audit you. For statement or phone audits of expired policies, we’ll typically notify you a week or two after your policy expires. We’ll then try to complete the audit within two months. For field audits, we generally complete them in around six weeks to three months.
 
What Is the Purpose of a Workers Comp Audit?
Your Workers comp policy requires audits to verify your estimated payroll. These audits help make sure you’re paying the right amount for the right coverage. Depending on your state, Workers compensation audits can also be a legal requirement.
 
When Should I Expect a Workers Comp Audit?
Our insurance agents start the audit process by sending you a notice that your premium audit is due within 35 days.1 In most cases, our premium auditors will notify you by email. To complete the audit, you’ll need to send us your payroll records and answer any questions we have about your business’ operation.
 
Remember that premium audits are not done at random. They’re mandatory when you have a Workers compensation policy.
 
If your Workers comp policy gets canceled, a premium audit will likely happen for the policy period when you had coverage.2
 
How Does The Hartford Do a Workers Compensation Audit?
Our auditors almost always reach out by email. In this email, they’ll let you know if we’ll be doing your audit by phone, in-person or online.
 
Regardless of how we perform your audit, we’re an insurance carrier that works hard to make the process as easy as possible. That’s why we offer our online self-service portal. We can do many of our audits online through this portal.
 
How Does The Hartford Schedule a Workers Comp Audit?
In some cases, The Hartford may make an appointment with you for a field audit or phone audit. If this is the case, you can count on us to be flexible with your schedule. We’ll be sure to schedule your audit on your terms when it works best for you. We’ll also schedule field audits at your place of business and be sure to tell you exactly what records you need in advance.
 
How Are Appointments for Workers Comp Audits Made?
Most of the time, our auditors at The Hartford will notify you by email when we’re auditing your business.
 
Types of Workers Compensation Audits
We do most of our audits digitally, but in some cases, we request other types of audits.
 
Field audits are physical audits on-site at your place of business.
Phone audits are done remotely. There’s no travel needed for these Workers compensation audits. Once you send us your information, we’ll schedule the phone audit.
Comply With Your Insurer During a Workers Comp Audit
Providing your Workers compensation insurer with the information they’ve requested is important. It’s also important that the information you send is accurate.
 
In fact, there are penalties for providing false information, including policy cancellation or fines. Some examples of fraudulent actions include:
 
Underreporting payroll to reduce a Workers comp premium.
Supplying inaccurate job descriptions to represent lower risk for reduced Workers compensation premiums.
Providing false financial documents, such as fake tax returns.
Not reporting subcontractors to lower your Workers compensation premium. Make sure you check your state’s laws to see if you need to report independent contractors.
Getting the Results of a Workers Comp Audit
Our premium audit team will provide updates on your audit throughout the process. Audits usually take two weeks to complete.3
 
With each audit, we’re striving for the same goal: to ensure your payroll matches up with the payroll listed on your policy. If your payroll is too low, your audit may generate an additional premium. If you payroll is too high, we may lower your premium.
 
Audit reports also show changes to your classifications. If your business is misclassified, our team of auditors may add new Workers comp class codes, which can change your premium. This is why reporting your business’ jobs accurately is essential during the small business IRS audit process.
 
Prepare for a Workers Compensation Audit
The best way to be ready for an audit is to always be prepared. You can do this by:
 
Organizing all your documents
Collecting information you need consistently
Documenting any changes to job descriptions and other business functions as they happen
Conducting the Workers Comp Year-End Review to have all the necessary documentation
If you keep these tips in mind, you won’t have to scramble to find key information for your Workers compensation audit.

Create a Workers Comp Audit Checklist
Auditors need financial information for the period covered by your Workers compensation policy.
 
To prepare for your Workers compensation audit, consider creating a Workers compensation audit checklist to help keep track of:4
 
1. Employee information, including Form 941 for policies with employee payroll. For policies without employee payroll, you’ll need the Schedule C Tax Form or other Income Tax Forms along with other payroll records.
 
2. Owners, officers and partners information, including payroll information like:
 
Their name
The state where they work
Their corporate title
The percentage of stock they own
How long they’ve been employed
Their total earnings
3. Payment and certificate verification, including:
 
1099 Forms
Certificates of insurance for each leased employee or subcontractor
4. Your business’s information, including:
 
Your general ledger
Sales journal
Cash receipts
Sales tax records
Workers Comp Audit Checklist
Remember, the main items you’ll need for your Workers compensation audit are:
 
An accounting ledger
Tax forms such as W-2, 1099, Form 941, Form 944 and a federal tax returns
Certificate of insurance for every subcontractor
Detailed descriptions of each business function
This list can change depending on what state your business is in. Contact our specialists at The Hartford to ensure you have all the information you need by calling 855-829-1683.

Workers Compensation Audit
A Workers compensation audit is a checkup to ensure your insurance company has the most up-to-date information on you and your employees. This confirms that you have the right amount of business insurance coverage. 
